List out any 5 barriers to learning. Against each barrier to learning, mention on how to overcome( mention your own barriers to learning) 5 marks *

Procrastination 
Overthinking 
Time management
Peer pressure
Lack of confidence

1. Procrastination  :- Procrastination is the act of delaying or postponing a task or set of tasks. We need to plan our daily routine in such a way that we can cater our time efficiently to our priorities. To overcome procrastination, we should improve our focus and concentration which can be done by the practice of Meditation, Pranayama and Sudarshan Kriya

2. Overthinking :- Living in the present moment is key to learning how to stop overthinking. We need to take a break to reset out thoughts and refresh our brain. One needs to make a decision and be active instead of overthinking passively which just consumes energy and time.

3. Time management :- Without time management it can seem overwhelming to perform even the simplest of tasks. In the end, the stress reaches a peak when we need to achieve a task. One can effectively manage time by prioritizing wisely, and setting acheivable and measurable goals. Having a conscious control over the amount of time spent on all required activities increases efficieny and productivity. It brings balance in life.

4. Peer pressure :- It can seldom be very demotivating when we come under peer pressure, and it is really difficult to deal with life if we succumb to it. One can overcome peer pressure by firstly having self- belief and not having a fear of failing. One shouldn't shy away from even beginning the task, with the fear of not acheiving perfectionism seeing other peers. Meditation and Sudarshan Kriya can help in relaxing the mind and coping with such stress.

5. Lack of confidence :- Having the fear to take up any challenge is a major barrier to learning. One should not be lazy and passive, not willing to come out of one's comfort zone. Overcoming overthinking and improving focus on a single task through meditation and Pranayama. Self-trust is the essential aspect for having the motivation to perform a task and having confidence. 


// comfort zone motivation




Explain POINT methodology with an example in 5 steps ( not to use the examples mentioned in the reading material) 5 marks *
1. Perception
2. Observation
3. Inference
4. Newness
5. Traditional















